Adam Sexton • Tintin Pantoja

Copyright © 2008 by Adam Sexton and Tintin Pantoja. All rights reserved.
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Legal Department, Wiley Publishing, Inc., 10475 Crosspoint Blvd., Indianapolis, IN 46256,
(317) 572-3447, fax (317) 572-4355, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, and related trademarks and trade dress are trademarks
or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc. is not associated
with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties,
including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may
be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that
the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional services. If
professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be
sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising here from.
The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a
potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher
endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it
may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may
have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support
please contact our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at (800) 762-2974, outside
the U.S. at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, please visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2007940615
ISBN: 978-0-470-09757-1
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Book design by Elizabeth Brooks
Book production by Wiley Publishing, Inc. Composition Services

Suiting the Action to the Word:
Shakespeare and Manga

Act I

Act II

Act III

Act IV

Act V

1

5

41

71

117

139

Adam Sexton is the author of Master Class in Fiction Writing and
the editor of the anthologies Love Stories, Rap on Rap, and
Desperately Seeking Madonna. He has written on art and entertainment for The New York Times and The Village Voice, and he teaches
fiction writing and literature at New York University and critical reading and writing at Parsons School of Design. A graduate
of Columbia University and the University of Pennsylvania, he
lives in Brooklyn with his wife and son.
Tintin Pantoja is a graphic artist dividing her time between
Indonesia and Manila. She graduated from the School of Visual
Arts in New York in 2006, having arrived in New York—her
first time in America—a month before the World Trade Center
attacks in 2001. She is now working on several illustrated projects. Tintin’s work can be viewed on her Web site: tintin
pantoja.com

Suiting the Action to the Word:
Shakespeare and Manga
by Adam Sexton

“Suit the action to the word, the word to the action...”
—Hamlet (Act III, Scene 2)

Four hundred years after the writing of William Shakespeare’s
plays, it is clear that they are timeless. This is due in part to their
infinite adaptability. The plays have been translated into dozens
of languages and performed all over the world. Famously creative stage productions have included a version of Julius Caesar
set in Fascist Europe during the 1930s and a so-called “voodoo
Macbeth.” Nor have gender and age proved barriers to casting
Shakespeare’s characters. The role of Hamlet is occasionally
played by a woman—an appropriate reversal, considering that
boys acted all the female roles in Shakespeare’s day—while the
teenaged Romeo and Juliet have been portrayed by couples in
their forties and fifties.
It is common knowledge that the plays of Shakespeare
transfer especially well to the movie screen. Such has been the
case since Thomas Edison made one of the first sound films ever
using a scene from As You Like It. Recent cinema standouts
include William Shakespeare’s Romeo + Juliet, directed by Baz
Luhrmann, and Michael Almereyda’s Hamlet. Both take place in
the present day or near future: Leonardo DiCaprio’s Romeo
wears a Hawaiian shirt—and Julia Stiles’ Ophelia wears a wire,
so Claudius and Polonius can eavesdrop on her conversation
with Hamlet. Otherwise, these adaptations remain surprisingly
faithful to Shakespeare’s texts. And both hit the audience as
hard as conventional stage productions in which the actors are
1

outfitted with doublets and hose, crossed swords, and what
Hamlet calls “a bare bodkin”—his unsheathed dagger (replaced
in Almereyda’s movie by a gun).
Shakespeare’s plays have been set to music as well, in
operas and ballets by composers such as Verdi, Tchaikovsky,
and Prokofiev. The early comedy Two Gentlemen of Verona was
adapted for Broadway by the composer of Hair, and it won the
Tony award for Best Musical the same year that Grease was
nominated. In the words of theater critic Jan Kott, Shakespeare
is indeed “our contemporary.”
In short, though some consider the plays of William
Shakespeare to be sacrosanct, they have been cut, expanded (it
was common in the Victorian era to add songs and even happy
endings to the tragedies), and adapted to multiple media, emerging none the worse for wear. Although we cannot be sure of this,
it seems likely that the writer, who was a popular artist and a
savvy businessman as well as an incomparable poet, would
approve.
The graphic novels known as manga (Japanese for “whimsical pictures”) are a natural medium for Shakespeare’s work.
Like his tragedies, comedies, histories, and romances, which are
thrillingly dynamic if properly staged, manga are of course
visual. In fact, a manga is potentially more visual than a stage
production of one of the plays of Shakespeare. Unbound by the
physical realities of the theater, the graphic novel can depict any
situation, no matter how fantastical or violent, that its creators
are able to pencil, ink, and shade.
Take Romeo and Juliet’s famous Queen Mab speech. Even the
most creative stage director cannot faithfully present the minuscule fairy described by Mercutio. Manga artists can. The same is
true of the drowning of Ophelia in Hamlet. It is precisely because
these vignettes are unstageable that Shakespeare has his characters describe Queen Mab and the death of Ophelia in such great
detail—they must help us imagine them. In its unlimited ability
2

to dramatize, the graphic novel more closely resembles a contemporary film with a colossal special-effects budget than anything
produced in the Elizabethan era or since.
At the same time, manga are potentially no less verbal than
Shakespeare’s spectacularly wordy plays, with this crucial difference: in a production of one of the plays onstage or onscreen,
we can hear the words but can’t see them. Though Shakespeare
is never easy, reading helps. And that is precisely what manga
adaptations of the plays allow. Perusing a Shakespeare manga,
the reader can linger over speeches, rereading them in part or
altogether. Especially in the long and intricate soliloquies typical
of Shakespearean tragedy, this allows for an appreciation of the
playwright’s craft that is difficult if not impossible as those soliloquies move past us during a performance.
Overall, turning the pages of a manga version of one of
Shakespeare’s plays is something like reading the text of that
play while attending a performance, but at one’s own pace.
Manga is not merely a new medium for the plays of William
Shakespeare, but one that is distinctly different from anything
to have come before.
A note on authenticity: In order to fit our adaptations into
books of less than 200 pages, the writers and editors of The
Manga Editions have cut words, lines, speeches, even entire
scenes from Shakespeare’s plays, a practice almost universal
among stage and film directors. We have never paraphrased the
playwright’s language, however, nor have we summarized
action. Everything you read in The Manga Editions was written
by William Shakespeare himself. Finally, footnotes don’t interrupt the characters’ speeches here, any more than they would in
a production of one of Shakespeare’s plays onstage or on film.

There is no play better suited to the manga approach than Hamlet,
Shakespeare’s tragedy about Hamlet, prince of Denmark, who is
3

instructed by the ghost of his father, King Hamlet, to kill his
Uncle Claudius. Since murdering Hamlet’s father, Claudius has
become king of Denmark himself and has married Hamlet’s
mother, Queen Gertrude. Prince Hamlet has a girlfriend,
Ophelia, who is the daughter of Claudius’s most trusted advisor
(Polonius) and the sister of Hamlet’s rival, Laertes. Hamlet’s best
friend, Horatio, and two college chums, Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern, visit him during the play. Of all these characters,
only one survives to the end of the story.
The play is manga-friendly because it is unarguably actionpacked, complete with a terrifying ghost, a tussle in an open
grave, and a climactic swordfight during which four central
characters die violent deaths. At least one character in Hamlet
goes insane and two characters commit suicide, one of them by
accident. There’s an inadvertent murder, as well as two accomplished from afar, by trickery. Another murder, achieved by
pouring poison into the victim’s ear, takes place before the story
starts and is reenacted in the course of a play within the play.
At the same time, not one of Shakespeare’s plays contains
more internal material—thoughts, feelings, hopes, fears and
ideas—than Hamlet. Hamlet himself delivers five soliloquies
throughout the course of the tragedy named for him, and all are
masterpieces of poetry and rhetoric, philosophy and wordplay.
Though Shakespeare’s Hamlet: The Manga Edition doesn’t explain
the soliloquies, it gives us the opportunity to read and reread them
in the context of the visually-presented action described above.
By means of dynamic new medium of manga, Shakespeare’s timeless tragedy is thereby made new—again.

4

978-0-470-09759-5

978-0-470-09757-1

$9.99 US/$11.99 CAN

$9.99 US/$11.99 CAN

ore full-throttle
action and ambition
gone haywire. More
dreams and schemes.
Alliances and betrayals.
Murders and mayhem.
Passions and poisons.
Shakespeare has it
all, and now you can
experience the action
and appreciate the
intrigue in these manga
editions. All of these
books combine the
classic art form and
classic literature and
feature an introduction
that sets the stage so
you’re engrossed from
the first page.
COMING IN 2009!
Huck Finn—The Manga Edition
978-0-470-15287-4
The Scarlet Letter—The Manga Edition
978-0-470-14889-1

978-0-470-09760-1

978-0-470-09758-8

$9.99 US/$11.99 CAN

$9.99 US/$11.99 CAN

Look for these fast-paced manga editions
wherever books are sold.
Wiley, the Wiley logo, CliffsNotes, and CliffsNotes.com are trademarks or registered trademarks
of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries.

