                        The Little Prince
                        by Antoine de Saint-Exupery

Chapter 1

Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book,
called True Stories from Nature, about the primeval forest. It was a
picture of a boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal.

In the book it said: 'Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole,
without chewing it. After that they are not able to move, and they
sleep through the six months that they need for digestion.'

I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle. And
after some work with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my
first drawing. My Drawing Number One.

Chapter 2

I lived my life alone, without anyone that I could really talk to,
until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago.
Something was broken in my engine. And as I had with me neither a mechanic
nor any passengers, I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone.

It was a question of life or death for me: I had barely enough drinking
water to last eight days. The first night, then, I went to sleep on
the sand, a thousand miles from any human habitation.

Chapter 3

It took me a long time to learn where he came from. The little prince,
who asked me so many questions, never seemed to hear the ones I asked him.
It was from words dropped by chance that, little by little,
everything was revealed to me.

When he saw my airplane for the first time, he asked:
'What is that object?'
'That is not an object. It flies. It is an airplane.'
'Oh! You come from the sky then?'

Chapter 4

I had thus learned a second fact of great importance:
his planet of origin was scarcely any larger than a house!
But that did not really surprise me much. I knew very well that in
addition to the great planets such as Earth, Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
there are also hundreds of others that are sometimes so small that
one has a hard time seeing them through the telescope.

Chapter 5

Each day I would learn something new about the planet, about the
departure, about the journey. It would come very slowly, in the
course of casual remarks. In this way I heard about the flowers.

The little prince had watched very seriously as I unpacked my drawing
materials. 'What are those?' he asked.
'These are baobabs.'
I had been working on my drawing of the baobabs.

Chapter 6

Oh, little prince! Bit by bit I came to understand the secrets of your
sad little life. For a long time you had found your only entertainment
in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset. I learned that new
detail on the morning of the fourth day, when you said to me:
'I am very fond of sunsets. Come, let us go look at a sunset now.'

